---
title: "Sustainability through Repair: Empowering Biomedical Engineers to Keep Medical Devices Running"
collection: talks
type: "Presentation"
permalink: /talks/2025-10-02-biomeds
venue: "Adelaide Convention and Exhibition Centre"
date: 2025-10-02
location: "Adelaide, SA, Australia"
---

[More information here](https://wc2025.org/program/))

As medical devices in our healthcare system are becoming more and more sophisticated with
embedded software, robotics, and AI technologies, it is becoming more and more challenging
to keep these devices operational when problems arise. Often, the biomedical engineers who
are tasked with maintaining and servicing these devices face legal and practical barriers to
the repair of medical devices, despite their high level of qualification and skills. Intellectual
property protections asserted by the manufacturers often mean that manuals, schematics and
diagnostic software are not available. Training and certification for these devices can be
prohibitively expensive. The Australian Productivity Commission has found that medical
device manufacturers routinely restrict access to repair information and spare parts, leading
to detrimental impacts for patients as well as increased costs, shorter device lifespans.

To move to a sustainable health care system, we need to keep our devices in operation for
longer. This paper argues whether an Australian ‘right to repair’ law for medical devices could
help achieve this. The push for the right to repair across a wide range of industries recognises
that legal, regulatory and policy reform is needed to ensure access to repair information and
tools. However, the issues are complex, involving intellectual property, competition law and
safety regulations. There is little scholarship available in Australia about the experiences of
people at the front line, such as biomedical engineers.

Many medical device manufacturers oppose the idea of a medical device right to repair
outright, arguing that the potential risk of patient harm is too high. However, official reports
have found that these concerns are likely overstated: there is still scope to improve access to
repair information and tools, thus enabling in-house and independent repa
